Add additional dbt on Astro context (#3989)
astronomer/docs: astro/deploy-dbt-project.md

id: deploy-dbt-project
description: Learn how to deploy and run dbt projects with Apache Airflow on Astro.
---

import HostedBadge from '@site/src/components/HostedBadge';

<HostedBadge/>

To orchestrate dbt jobs with Apache Airflow, you need to deploy your dbt project to Astro alongside your DAGs and the rest of your Airflow code. Astro supports a range of options when it comes to adding your dbt project your Airflow deployment.

> Depending on your organization's software development lifecycle, your dbt project might live within your Astro project, in the same Git repository, in an entirely different repository. Astronomer supports all of these methods, but recommends having a single Git repository with your dbt project and Astro project in different directories, and then using [Option 2](#option-2-use-dbt-deploys-to-independently-ship-dbt-code). This means that your teams working in dbt can remain separate from your teams managing Airflow DAGs, but they can all see shared code in one place. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on your organization's software development lifecycle, there are three ways you can organize your dbt project relative to your Astro project:

- In the same Git repository and directory as your Astro project.
- In the same Git repository, but in a separate directory.
- In a separate Git repository.

Astro supports all three methods, but Astronomer recommends having your dbt project in the same Git repository as your Astro project but in a different directory. Then, you can use [Option 2](#option-2-use-dbt-deploys-to-independently-ship-dbt-code) to deploy code from your dbt directory. That way, your team that maintains dbt can work independently from your team managing Airflow DAGs but all team members can all see shared code in a single Git repository.
```

> This guide covers the options for attaching dbt code to Astro deployments, along with their pros and cons, so you can choose the best option for your team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide includes information on the different options your team has for deploying dbt code to Apache Airflow and Astro. Your team can choose the option that best fits your team's software development lifecycle.

For more information and recommendations on using dbt with Apache Airflow and Astro, see [Orchestrate dbt Core jobs with Airflow and Cosmos](airflow-dbt.md).
```

## Feature overview

Astro supports two basic dbt code deployment strategies. You can:

> 1. **Include dbt code to your Astro runtime image**: make dbt code directly available in Astro project runtime image. This approach works best for small teams just starting out integrating dbt code inside of Astro

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Include dbt code in your Astro project**: Make dbt code directly available in the Docker image powered by Astro Runtime that contains your Astro project. This approach works best for small teams just starting out integrating dbt code inside of Astro
```

> 2. **Use dbt Deploys to independently ship dbt code**: independently deploy bundles of dbt code directly to Astro. Astronomer recommends this approach for teams that have dbt code in locations other than their Astro project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Use dbt Deploys**: Independently deploy bundles of dbt code directly to Astro, outside of the context of your Astro project and Docker image. Astronomer recommends this approach for teams that have dbt code in a dedicated directory or Git repository.
```

> ## Best practice guidance
> 
> Depending on your organization's structure and needs, Astronomer recommends either including dbt code in your image builds or using dbt Deploys. Regardless of your dbt code deployment strategy, we recommend using [Astronomer Cosmos](https://www.astronomer.io/cosmos/), the open-source standard for combining dbt code and Airflow.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Let's delete this and keep this in the intro

> ### Prerequisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites
```

- An Astro Deployment

> - An Astro project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An Astro project. Astronomer supports both dbt Cloud and dbt Core
```

- A dbt project
- The [Astro CLI v1.28 or greater](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/astro/cli/install-cli)

> ### Option 1: Include dbt code in your Astro runtime image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Option 1: Include dbt code in your Astro runtime image
```

The most direct way to set up dbt on Astro is by including dbt code in your runtime image. To accomplish this, Astronomer recommends adding the directory `/dbt` to the top-level of your Astro project and including individual dbt projects inside of this directory.

:::tip
To see an example of this pattern in action, check out the demo repo of [Astronomer Cosmos](https://github.com/astronomer/cosmos-demo).
:::

Finally, to push your new dbt code to your Deployment, perform a deploy with the Astro CLI by running:

```bash
astro deploy
```

While this is the quickest way to get dbt code in your deployment, there can be downsides as your team makes more frequent changes to dbt code or uses more advanced CI/CD. Some of these downsides include:

1. Slower build times when changing only dbt code
2. dbt code must live in the same place as your Astro project
3. Multiple teams developing Airflow and dbt separately must re-deploy the entire Astro project for each iteration

If these downsides become applicable to your team, try Option 2.

> ### Option 2: Use dbt Deploys to independently ship dbt code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Option 2: Use dbt Deploys to independently ship dbt code
```

> :::privatepreview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::publicpreview
```

:::

dbt Deploys allow you to easily deploy your dbt project to Astro without needing complex processes to incorporate your two sets of code. When you use a dbt Deploy, Astro bundles all files in your dbt project and pushes them to Astro, where they are mounted on your Airflow containers so that your DAGs can access them. This allows you to deploy dbt code without requiring you to use a full Astro image deploy.

> #### Step 1: (Optional) Deploy your full Astro image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 1: (Optional) Deploy your full Astro image
```

In order to first deploy a dbt project to Astro, Astronomer recommends that you have an Astro project already running on your Deployment with DAGs that need to read from dbt. That way, your dbt project will be read and used when you deploy it.

If you are using a new Deployment, first deploy your Astro project with the Astro CLI by running:

```bash
astro deploy
```

> #### Step 2: Deploy your dbt project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2: Deploy your dbt project
```

Next, navigate to the directory of your dbt project. This directory should include the `dbt_project.yml` file, such as the [classic dbt jaffle shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle-shop-classic?tab=readme-ov-file) example shown below:

![Jaffle shop project structure](/img/docs/reset-password.png)

From the CLI, run the following command to deploy your dbt project. The command prompts you to choose the Deployment that you want to deploy your dbt project to.

```bash
astro dbt deploy
```

By default, this command attaches the dbt code to the default path of `/usr/local/airflow/dbt/<dbt-project-name>`.

See [`astro dbt deploy`](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/astro/cli/astro-dbt-deploy) for more information about this command.

:::tip

If your dbt code is accessed at a different path or folder than the default path, specify a custom mount path with the following flag:

```bash
astro dbt deploy --mount-path /usr/local/airflow/dbt/example-dbt-project
```

:::

Congrats, you've added your dbt code to your deployment! Check the Astro UI to see more information about your dbt Deploy.

> ![Astro UI with dbt Deploys](/img/docs/reset-password.png)

Author: @lzdanski only thing I'm struggling with here is how to add assets to docs -- I've included this img path temporarily, but we'll chat later on how to add these

Reviewer 2: It's tricky and we have some formatting conventions with a software that I have a license for an you probably don't, so I can take care of them.

> #### Delete your dbt project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Delete your dbt project
```

id: deploy-dbt-project
description: Learn how to deploy and run dbt projects with Apache Airflow on Astro.
---

import HostedBadge from '@site/src/components/HostedBadge';

<HostedBadge/>

> :::publicpreview
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Don't need a badge here because this doc isn't "only" about dbt deploys

id: deploy-dbt-project
description: Learn how to deploy and run dbt projects with Apache Airflow on Astro.
---

import HostedBadge from '@site/src/components/HostedBadge';

<HostedBadge/>

> To orchestrate dbt jobs with Apache Airflow, you need to deploy your dbt project to Astro alongside your DAGs and the rest of your Airflow code. Astro supports a range of options when it comes to adding your dbt project to your Astro Deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Astro supports a range of options when it comes to adding your dbt project to your Deployment. To orchestrate dbt jobs with Apache Airflow, you first need to deploy your dbt project to Astro along with your DAGs and the rest of your Airflow code.
```

Depending on your organization's software development lifecycle, there are three ways you can organize your dbt project relative to your Astro project:

- In the same Git repository and directory as your Astro project.
- In the same Git repository, but in a separate directory.
- In a separate Git repository.

> Astro supports all three methods, but Astronomer recommends having your dbt project in the same Git repository as your Astro project but in a different directory. Then, you can use [Option 2](#option-2-use-dbt-deploys-to-independently-ship-dbt-code) to deploy code from your dbt directory. That way, your team that maintains dbt can work independently from your team managing Airflow DAGs but all team members can all see shared code in a single Git repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Astro supports all three methods, but recommends having your dbt project in the same Git repository as your Astro project, but in a different directory. Then, you can use dbt deploys to independently deploy dbt code to Astro from your dbt directory, without needing to deploy either a full Astro project image or your DAGs. This strategy allows your team that maintains dbt to work independently from your team managing Airflow DAGs, but team members can all see shared code in a single Git repository.
```

This guide includes information on the different options your team has for deploying dbt code to Apache Airflow and Astro. Your team can choose the option that best fits your team's software development lifecycle.

For more information and recommendations on using dbt with Apache Airflow and Astro, see [Orchestrate dbt Core jobs with Airflow and Cosmos](airflow-dbt.md).

## Feature overview

Astro supports two basic dbt code deployment strategies. You can:

1. **Include dbt code in your Astro project**: Make dbt code directly available in the Docker image powered by Astro Runtime that contains your Astro project. This approach works best for small teams just starting out integrating dbt code inside of Astro
2. **Use dbt Deploys**: Independently deploy bundles of dbt code directly to Astro, outside of the context of your Astro project and Docker image. Astronomer recommends this approach for teams that have dbt code in a dedicated directory or Git repository.

## Best practice guidance

> Depending on your organization's structure and needs, Astronomer recommends either including dbt code in your image builds or using dbt Deploys. Regardless of your dbt code deployment strategy, we recommend using [Astronomer Cosmos](https://www.astronomer.io/cosmos/), the open-source standard for combining dbt code and Airflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Depending on your organization's structure and needs, Astronomer recommends either including dbt code in your image builds or using dbt Deploys and using [Astronomer Cosmos](https://www.astronomer.io/cosmos/), the open-source standard for combining dbt code and Airflow.
```

### Prerequisites

- An Astro Deployment
- An Astro project
- A dbt project
- The [Astro CLI v1.28 or greater](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/astro/cli/install-cli)

### Option 1: Include dbt code in your Astro runtime image

> The most direct way to set up dbt on Astro is by including dbt code in your runtime image. To accomplish this, Astronomer recommends adding the directory `/dbt` to the top-level of your Astro project and including individual dbt projects inside of this directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most direct way to set up dbt on Astro is by including dbt code in your full image. To accomplish this, Astronomer recommends adding the directory `/dbt` to the top-level of your Astro project and including individual dbt projects inside of this directory.
```
We don't really use the phrase "runtime image". It's usually "full project image" or "complete project"

:::tip

> To see an example of this pattern in action, check out the demo repo of [Astronomer Cosmos](https://github.com/astronomer/cosmos-demo).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To see an example of this pattern , check out the demo repository of [Astronomer Cosmos](https://github.com/astronomer/cosmos-demo).
```

:::

Finally, to push your new dbt code to your Deployment, perform a deploy with the Astro CLI by running:

```bash
astro deploy
```

> While this is the quickest way to get dbt code in your deployment, there can be downsides as your team makes more frequent changes to dbt code or uses more advanced CI/CD. Some of these downsides include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this is the quickest way to get dbt code in your Deployment, there can be drawbacks as your team makes more frequent changes to dbt code or uses more advanced CI/CD. Some of these include:
```

> 1. Slower build times when changing only dbt code
> 2. dbt code must live in the same place as your Astro project
> 3. Multiple teams developing Airflow and dbt separately must re-deploy the entire Astro project for each iteration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Slower build times when changing only dbt code.
2. dbt code must live in the same repository and directory as your Astro project.
3. Multiple teams developing Airflow and dbt separately must re-deploy the entire Astro project for each iteration.
```

### Option 2: Use dbt Deploys to independently ship dbt code

:::publicpreview
:::

dbt Deploys allow you to easily deploy your dbt project to Astro without needing complex processes to incorporate your two sets of code. When you use a dbt Deploy, Astro bundles all files in your dbt project and pushes them to Astro, where they are mounted on your Airflow containers so that your DAGs can access them. This allows you to deploy dbt code without requiring you to use a full Astro image deploy.

### Step 1: (Optional) Deploy your full Astro image

In order to first deploy a dbt project to Astro, Astronomer recommends that you have an Astro project already running on your Deployment with DAGs that need to read from dbt. That way, your dbt project will be read and used when you deploy it.

If you are using a new Deployment, first deploy your Astro project with the Astro CLI by running:

```bash
astro deploy
```

### Step 2: Deploy your dbt project

Next, navigate to the directory of your dbt project. This directory should include the `dbt_project.yml` file, such as the [classic dbt jaffle shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle-shop-classic?tab=readme-ov-file) example shown below:

> ![Jaffle shop project structure](/img/docs/jaffle-shop-project-structure.png)

Author: Can we put this image here? 

<img width="892" alt="Screenshot 2024-07-31 at 2 02 05 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2623c48e-9436-4444-99d7-f82e361ff9f6">

Author: @lzdanski added the two images to include in the docs!

Reviewer 2: Instead of an image, going with a text directory code example. This can be helpful because the `.` implies the level in the directory to run the CLI command from

From the CLI, run the following command to deploy your dbt project. The command prompts you to choose the Deployment that you want to deploy your dbt project to.

```bash
astro dbt deploy
```

> By default, this command attaches the dbt code to the default path of `/usr/local/airflow/dbt/<dbt-project-name>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, `astro dbt deploy` attaches the dbt code to the default path of `/usr/local/airflow/dbt/<dbt-project-name>`.
```

See [`astro dbt deploy`](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/astro/cli/astro-dbt-deploy) for more information about this command.

:::tip

If your dbt code is accessed at a different path or folder than the default path, specify a custom mount path with the following flag:

```bash
astro dbt deploy --mount-path /usr/local/airflow/dbt/example-dbt-project
```

:::

> Congrats, you've added your dbt code to your deployment! Check the Astro UI to see more information about your dbt Deploy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Congratulations, you've added your dbt code to your Deployment! Check the [Astro UI](https://cloud.astronomer.io/) to see more information about your dbt Deploy.
```

> ![Astro UI with dbt Deploys](/img/docs/astro-ui-with-dbt-deploys.png)

Author: Can we put this image here? https://www.astronomer.io/images/posts/image1-1.png

id: deploy-dbt-project
description: Learn how to deploy and run dbt projects with Apache Airflow on Astro.
---

import HostedBadge from '@site/src/components/HostedBadge';

<HostedBadge/>

Astro supports a range of options when it comes to adding your dbt project to your Deployment. To orchestrate dbt jobs with Apache Airflow, you first need to deploy your dbt project to Astro along with your DAGs and the rest of your Airflow code.

This guide includes information on the different options your team has for deploying dbt code to Apache Airflow and Astro. Your team can choose the option that best fits your team's software development lifecycle.

For more information and recommendations on using dbt with Apache Airflow and Astro, see [Orchestrate dbt Core jobs with Airflow and Cosmos](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/learn/airflow-dbt).

## Repository strategy

Depending on your organization's software development lifecycle, there are three ways you can organize your dbt project relative to your Astro project:

- In the same Git repository and directory as your Astro project.

> - In the same Git repository, but in a separate directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- In the same Git repository but in a separate directory.
```

- In a separate Git repository.

> Astro supports all three methods, but recommends having your dbt project in the same Git repository as your Astro project, but in a different directory. Then, you can use dbt deploys to independently deploy dbt code to Astro from your dbt directory, without needing to deploy either a full Astro project image or your DAGs. This strategy allows your team that maintains dbt to work independently from your team managing Airflow DAGs, but team members can all see shared code in a single Git repository.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Astro supports all three methods, but Astronomer recommends having your dbt project in the same Git repository as your Astro project, but in a different directory. Then, you can use dbt deploys to independently deploy dbt code to Astro from your dbt directory without needing to deploy either a full Astro project image or your DAGs. This strategy allows your team maintaining dbt to work independently from your team managing Airflow DAGs, but team members can all see shared code in a single Git repository.
```

You can see additional recommendations for Astro repository strategy, in the [Repo strategy best practices](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/astro/best-practices/repo-structure) guide.

## Feature overview

Astro supports two basic dbt code deploy strategies. You can:

- **Include dbt code in your Astro project**: Make dbt code directly available in the Docker image powered by Astro Runtime that contains your Astro project. This approach works best for small teams just starting to integrate dbt code in Astro.

> - **Use dbt Deploys**: Independently deploy bundles of dbt code directly to Astro, outside of the context of your Astro project and Docker image. Astronomer recommends this approach for teams that have dbt code in a dedicated directory or Git repository.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Use dbt Deploys**: Independently deploy bundles of dbt code directly to Astro, outside the context of your Astro project and Docker image. Astronomer recommends this approach for teams who have dbt code in a dedicated directory or Git repository.
```

## Option 1: Include dbt code in your Astro project {#option-1}

> The most direct way to set up dbt on Astro is by including dbt code in your full image. To accomplish this, Astronomer recommends adding the directory `/dbt` to the top-level of your Astro project and including individual dbt projects inside of this directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The most direct way to set up dbt on Astro is by including dbt code in your full image. To accomplish this, Astronomer recommends adding the directory `/dbt` to the top level of your Astro project and including individual dbt projects inside this directory.
```

:::tip
To see an example of this pattern, check out the demo repository of [Astronomer Cosmos](https://github.com/astronomer/cosmos-demo).
:::

Finally, to push your new dbt code to your Deployment, perform a deploy with the Astro CLI by running:

```bash
astro deploy
```

> While this is the quickest way to get dbt code in your Deployment, there can be drawbacks as your team makes more frequent changes to dbt code or uses more advanced CI/CD. Some of these include:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While this is the quickest way to get dbt code in your Deployment, there can be drawbacks if your team makes more frequent changes to dbt code or uses more advanced CI/CD. These include:
```

## Option 2: Use dbt Deploys to independently ship dbt code {#option-2}

:::publicpreview
:::

dbt Deploys allow you to easily deploy your dbt project to Astro without needing complex processes to incorporate your two sets of code. When you use a dbt Deploy, Astro bundles all files in your dbt project and pushes them to Astro, where they are mounted on your Airflow containers so that your DAGs can access them. This allows you to deploy dbt code without requiring you to use a full Astro image deploy.

### Prerequisites

- An Astro Deployment
- An Astro project. Astronomer supports both dbt Cloud and dbt Core.
- A dbt project
- The [Astro CLI v1.28 or greater](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/astro/cli/install-cli)

### Step 1: (Optional) Deploy your full Astro image

In order to first deploy a dbt project to Astro, Astronomer recommends that you have an Astro project already running on your Deployment with DAGs that need to read from dbt. That way, your dbt project will be read and used when you deploy it.

If you are using a new Deployment, first deploy your Astro project with the Astro CLI by running:

```bash
astro deploy
```

### Step 2: Deploy your dbt project

> Next, navigate to the directory of your dbt project. This directory should include the `dbt_project.yml` file, such as the [Classic dbt Jaffle Shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle-shop-classic?tab=readme-ov-file) in the following example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Next, navigate to the directory of your dbt project. This directory should include the `dbt_project.yml` file, as in the case of the [Classic dbt Jaffle Shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle-shop-classic?tab=readme-ov-file) in the following example:
```

```text
.
├── etc
├── models
├── seeds
├── .gitignore
├── LICENSE
├── README.MD
└── dbt_project.yml
```

From the CLI, run the following command to deploy your dbt project. The command prompts you to choose the Deployment that you want to deploy your dbt project to.

```bash
astro dbt deploy
```

By default, `astro dbt deploy` attaches the dbt code to the default path of `/usr/local/airflow/dbt/<dbt-project-name>`.

See [`astro dbt deploy`](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/astro/cli/astro-dbt-deploy) for more information about this command.

:::tip

If your dbt code is accessed at a different path or folder than the default path, specify a custom mount path with the following flag:

```bash
astro dbt deploy --mount-path /usr/local/airflow/dbt/example-dbt-project
```

:::

Congratulations, you've added your dbt code to your Deployment! Check the [Astro UI](https://cloud.astronomer.io/) to see more information about your dbt Deploy.

![Astro UI with dbt Deploys](/img/docs/dbt-deploy-example.png)

### Delete your dbt project

> If you want to remove dbt code from your deployment, you can also delete the dbt project from the Airflow environments where you deployed it. This command does not delete your dbt project source files, it only removes it from the Airflow containers where it was mounted. When you run this command, you will be prompted to choose the Deployment that you want to remove the project from.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to remove dbt code from your deployment, you can also delete the dbt project from the Airflow environments where you deployed it. This command does not delete your dbt project source files. It only removes your project from the Airflow containers where it was mounted. When you run this command, you will be prompted to choose the Deployment from which you want to remove the project.
```
